---
title: 'Volume of a Solid obtained by Revolving Area about an Axis'
weight: 9
---

# 9.9 Volume of a solid obtained by revolving area about an axis
Definite integrals have applications in finding volumes of solids of revolution about a fixed axis. By a solid of revolution about a fixed axis,we mean that a solid is generated when a plane region in a given plane undergoes one full revolution about a fixed axis in the plane. For instance,consider the semi circular plane region inside the circle x2 + y2 = a2 andabove the x-axis. See Fig.9.34.

If this region is given one complete rotation (revolution for 360° = 2radians) about x-axis, then a solid called a sphere is generated.In the same manner, if you want to generate a right-circular cylinder with radius a and height h, you can consider rectangularplane region bounded between the straight lines y = 0, y = a , x = 0 and x = h in the xy-plane. SeeFig.9.35. If this region is given one complete rotation (revolution for 360° = 2radians) about x-axis, then a solid called a cylinder is generated.
We restrict ourselves to obtain volume of solid of revolution about x-axis or y-axis. Whenever solid of revolution about x-axis is considered, the plane region that is revolved about x-axis lies above the x-axis. So, in this region y ≥ 0 . Whenever solid of revolution about y-axis is considered, the plane region that is revolved about y-axis lies to the right of y-axis. So, in this region x ≥ 0 . We shall findthe formula for finding the volume of the solid of revolution of the plane region in the first quadrant bounded by the curve y = f(x) , x-axis and the lines x = a and x = b > a about x-axis. The derivation of the formula is based upon the formula that the volume of a cylinder of radius r and the height
h is pr2h.Assume that every line parallel to y-axis lying between the lines x = a and x = b > a cuts the curve y = f (x) in the first quadrant exactly at one point. Divide [a,b] into n segments by such that

For each i = 0,1,2,..., n −1, the region in the xy-plane between the ordinates at x and x.x  which lies between the x-axis and the curve y = f (x) can be approximated to an infinitesimal rectangle having area y x iD , where y f x i i = ( ). When the plane region bounded by the curve y = f (x) , x-axis, and lines x = a and x = b is rotated by 360° about x-axis, each of the infinitesimal rectangles at x xi = also revolves and generates an elementary solid which is approximately a thin cylindrical disc with radius yi and height Dx . See Fig.9.36. The volume of the cylindrical disc at